=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Context::Singleton - Context specific singleton values

=head1 GLOSSARY

=head2 dependency

I<Singleton> which value is required to build another I<singleton>'s value

=head2 frame

Frame represents hierarchy. It is for data what block is for code.
Resource value is by default cached in the top-most frame providing
all its dependencies.

Cached values are destroyed upon leaving context.

=head2 rule

Rule specifies how to build singleton value

	contrive 'singleton' => ( ... );

There can be multiple rules for building a single I<singleton>.
The one with most relevant dependencies will be used.
When there are more available rules, the first defined will be used.

Refer L<#contrive ()> for more.

=head2 singleton

A value identified by string. Singleton identifier is global.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 What is a context specific singleton?

As your workflow handles its tasks, granularity become finer and certain
entities behaves like singletons.

As your application evolves, this granularity changes along with data model
and/or data representation.

=head2 How does it differ from the multiton pattern?

Multiton is a set of named singletons (global variables) whereas values
mantained by L<Context::Singleton> are context sensitive.

=head2 Doesn't C<local> already provide similar behaviour?

In addition to C<local> L<Context::Singleton> provides also immutability
in scope assignment and lazy values built on demand.

=head2 When use L<Context::Singleton>?

=over

=item When your application evolves

=item When your application has tests

=item

=head1 EXPORTED FUNCTIONS

L<Context::Singleton> uses L<Exporter::Tiny> to do hard work.

=head2 frame {}

	frame {
		...;
	}

Creates a new I<frame>, calls its argument while preserving list/scalar context,
and passes through returned value.

It doesn't consume any exception.

=head2 proclaim ()

	proclaim singleton => value;
	proclaim singleton_1 => value, singleton_2 => value2;

Define the value of a I<singleton> in the current I<frame>.

When it is already populated it throws an I<Context::Singleton::Exception::Deduced>
exception.

Returns the value of the last I<singleton> from the argument list.

=head2 deduce ()

	my $var = deduce 'singleton';

Returns a I<singleton> value relevant in current frame.

If I<singleton> value is not available, it tries to contrive it using
known rules or looks into parent I<frame>.

=head2 load_path ()

	load_path 'prefix-1', ...;

Evaluate all modules within given module prefix(es).
Every prefix is evaluated only once.

=head2 contrive ()

Defines new I<rule> how to build I<singleton> value

	contrive 'name'
		=> class   => 'Foo::Bar'
		=> deduce  => 'singleton'
		=> builder => 'new'
		=> default => { singleton_1 => 'v1', ... }
		=> dep     => [ 'singleton_2', ... ]
		=> dep     => { param_a => 'singleton_1', ... }
		=> as      => sub { ... }
		=> value   => 10
	;

=over

=item value => constant

Simplest rule, just constant value.

=item as => CODEREF

Defines code used to build singleton value. Dependencies are passed as arguments.

When used in conjuction with C<class> or C<deduce>, their value is passed as first
argument (mimics method call).

=item builder => method_name

Specifies method name to be applied on C<class> or C<deduce>.
Defaults to C<new>.

=item class => Class::Name

Calls the builder method with dependencies on the given class to build a value.
Automatically creates singleton C<Class::Name> with a rule dynamically loading
given class and returning its name, almost like:

	my $class_name = eval "require Class::Name; 'Class::Name'";
	$class_name->$builder (@deps);

When class I<singleton> is proclaimed class is not autoloaded.

See also: L<#contrive_class ()

=item deduce => singleton

Calls the builder method (with dependencies) on the object available
as a value of the given I<singleton>.

	my $object = deduce ('singleton');
	$object->$builder (@deps);

=item default => { singleton => value, ... }

Default values of dependencies. If used they are treated as deduced in root I<frame> but
not stored nor cached anywhere.

=item dep

Dependencies required for this rule.

Two forms are recognized at the moment:

=over

=item ARRAYREF

List of required singletons.
Passed as a list to the builder function

=item HASHREF

Hash values are treated as singleton names.
Passed as a list of named parameters to the builder function.

=back

=back

=head2 contrive_class ()

	contrive_class 'Class::Name';

Setup autoload mechanism same as when used C<contrive> with C<class>.

=head1 TUTORIAL

See short tutorial L<Context::Singleton::Tutorial>

=head1 REPOSITORY

https://github.com/happy-barney/perl-Context-Singleton

=head1 AUTHOR

Branislav Zahradník <barney@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This module can be distributed and modified under The Artistic License 2.0.

=cut
